2.2 Lesson 1

Certificate:

Linux Essentials

Version:

1.6

Topic:

2 Finding Your Way on a Linux System

Objective:

2.2 Using the Command Line to Get Help

Lesson:

1 of 1
Introduction

The command line is a very complex tool. Each command has its own unique options, therefore documentation is key when working with a Linux system. Besides the /usr/share/doc/ directory, which stores most of the documentation, various other tools provide information on using Linux commands. This chapter focuses on methods to access that documentation, with the purpose of getting help.

There are a multitude of methods to get help within the Linux command line. man, help and info are just a few of them. For Linux Essentials, we will be focusing on man and info as they are the most commonly used tools for obtaining help.

Another topic of this chapter will be locating files. You will mainly work with the locate command.
Getting Help on the Command Line
Built-in Help

When started with the --help parameter, most commands display some brief instructions about their usage. Although not all commands provide this switch, it is still a good first try to learn more about the parameters of a command. Be aware that the instructions from --help often are rather brief compared to the other sources of documentation which we will discuss in the rest of this lesson.
Man Pages

Most commands provide a manual page or “man” page. This documentation is usually installed with the software and can be accessed with the man command. The command whose man page should be displayed is added to man as an argument:

$ man mkdir

This command opens the man page for mkdir. You can use the up and down arrow keys or the space bar to navigate through the man page. To exit the man page, press Q.

Each man page is divided in maximum of 11 sections, though many of these sections are optional:
Section Description

NAME

Command name and brief description

SYNOPSIS

Description of the command’s syntax

DESCRIPTION

Description of the effects of the command

OPTIONS

Available options

ARGUMENTS

Available arguments

FILES

Auxiliary files

EXAMPLES

A sample of the command line

SEE ALSO

Cross-references to the related topics

DIAGNOSTICS

Warning and Error messages

COPYRIGHT

Author(s) of the command

BUGS

Any known limitations of the command

In practice, most man pages don’t contain all of these parts.

Man pages are organized in eight categories, numbered from 1 to 8:
Category Description

1

User command

2

System calls

3

Functions of the C library

4

Drivers and device files

5

Configuration files and file formats

6

Games

7

Miscellaneous

8

System administrator commands

9

Kernel functions (not standard)

Each man page belongs to exactly one category. However, multiple categories can contain man pages with the same name. Let’s take the passwd command as an example. This command can be used to change a user’s password. Since passwd is a user command, its man page resides in category 1. In addition to the passwd command, the password database file /etc/passwd also has a man page which is called passwd, too. As this file is a configuration file, it belongs to category 5. When referring to a man page, the category is often added to the name of the man page, as in passwd(1) or passwd(5) to identify the respective man page.

By default, man passwd displays the first available man page, in this case passwd(1). The category of the desired man page can be specified in a command such as man 1 passwd or man 5 passwd.

We have already discussed how to navigate through a man page and how to return to the command line. Internally, man uses the less command to display the man page’s content. less lets you search for text within a man page. To search for the word linux you can just use /linux for forward searching from the point that you are on the page, or ?linux to start a backward search. This action highlights the all the matching results and moves the page to the first highlighted match. In both cases you can type N to jump to the next match. In order to find more information about these additional features, press H and a menu with all the information will be displayed.
Info Pages

Another tool that will help you while working with the Linux system are the info pages. The info pages are usually more detailed than the man pages and are formatted in hypertext, similar to web pages on the Internet.

The info pages can be displayed like so:

$ info mkdir

For each info page, info reads an info file that is structured into individual nodes within a tree. Each node contains a simple topic and the info command contains hyperlinks that can help you move from one to the other. You can access the link by pressing enter while placing the cursor on one of the leading asterisks.

Similar to man, the info tool also has page navigation commands. You can find out more about these command by pressing ? while being on the info page. These tools will help you navigate the page easier as well as understand how to access the nodes and move within the node tree.
The /usr/share/doc/ directory

As mentioned before, the /usr/share/doc/ directory stores most documentation of the commands that the system is using. This directory contains a directory for most packages installed on the system. The name of the directory is usually the name of the package and occasionally its version. These directories include a README or readme.txt file that contains the package’s basic documentation. Alongside the README file, the folder can also contain other documentation files, such as the changelog which includes the history of the program in detail, or examples of configuration files for the specific package.

The information within the README file varies from one package to another. All files are written in plain text, therefore they can be read with any preferred text editor. The exact number and kinds of files depend on the package. Check some of the directories to get an overview of their contents.
Locating files
The locate command

A Linux system is built from numerous directories and files. Linux has many tools to locate a particular file within a system. The quickest one is the command locate.

locate searches within a database and then outputs every name that matches the given string:

$ locate note
/lib/udev/keymaps/zepto-znote
/usr/bin/zipnote
/usr/share/doc/initramfs-tools/maintainer-notes.html
/usr/share/man/man1/zipnote.1.gz

The locate command supports the usage of wildcards and regular expressions as well, therefore the search string does not have to match the entire name of the desired file. You will learn more about regular expressions in a later chapter.

By default, locate behaves as if the pattern would be surrounded by asterisks, so locate PATTERN is the same as locate _PATTERN_. This allows you just provide substrings instead of the exact filename. You can modify this behavior with the different options that you can find explained in the locate man page.

Because locate is reading from a database, you may not find a file that you recently created. The database is managed by a program named updatedb. Usually it is run periodically, but if you have root privileges and you need the database to be updated immediately, you can run the updatedb command yourself at any time.
The find command

find is another very popular tool that is used to search for files. This command has a different approach, compared to the locate command. find command searches a directory tree recursively, including its subdirectories. find does such a search at each invocation, it does not maintain a database like locate. Similar to locate, find also supports wildcards and regular expressions.

find requires at least the path it should search. Furthermore, so-called expressions can be added to provide filter criteria for which files to display. An example is the -name expression, which looks for files with a specific name:

~$ cd Downloads
~/Downloads
$ find . -name thesis.pdf
./thesis.pdf
~/Downloads
$ find ~ -name thesis.pdf
/home/carol/Downloads/thesis.pdf

The first find command searches for the file within the current Downloads directory, whereas the second one searches for the file in the user’s home directory.

The find command is very complex, therefore it will not be covered in the Linux Essentials exam. However, it is a powerful tool which is particularly handy in practice.
Guided Exercises

    Use the man command to find out what each command does:
    Command 	Description

    ls


    Display the contents of a directory.

    cat


    cut


    cd


    cp


    mv


    mkdir


    touch


    wc


    passwd


    rm


    rmdir


    more


    less


    whereis


    head


    tail


    sort


    tr


    chmod


    grep


    Open the ls info page and identify the MENU.

        What options do you have?

        Find the option that allows you to sort the output by modification time.

    Display the path to the first 3 README files. Use the man command to identify the correct option for locate.

    Create a file called test in your home directory. Find its absolute path with the locate command.

    Did you find it immediately? What did you have to do in order for locate to find it?

    Search for the test file that you previously created, using the find command. What syntax did you use and what is the absolute path ?

Explorational Exercises

    There is one command in the table above that doesn’t have a man page. Which one is it and why do you think that the command doesn’t have a man page?

    Using the commands in the table above, create the following file tree. The names that start with a capital are Directories and the ones in lower case are files.

    User
    ├── Documents
    |   ├──Hello
    |   |   ├──hey2
    |   |   ├──helloa
    |   |   └──ola5
    |   └──World
    |       └──earth9
    ├── Downloads
    |   ├──Music
    |   └──Songs
    |       ├──collection1
    |       └──collection2
    ├── Test
    |   └── passa
    └── test

    Display on the screen the present working directory, including the subfolders.

    Search within the tree for all files that end with a number.

    Remove the entire directory tree with a single command.

Summary

In this lesson you learned:

    How to get help

    How to use the man command

    How to navigate the man page

    Different sections of the man page

    How to use the info command

    How to navigate between different nodes

    How to search for files within the system

Commands used in the exercises:

man

    Display a man page.

info

    Display an info page.

locate

    Search the locate database for files with a specific name.

find

    Search the file system for names matching a set of selection criteria.

updatedb

    Update the locate database.

Answers to Guided Exercises

    Use the man command to find out what each command does:
    Command 	Description

    ls


    Display the contents of a directory.

    cat


    Concatenates or views text files

    cut


    Removes sections from a text file

    cd


    Changes to a different directory

    cp


    Copies a file

    mv


    Moves a file (it can also be used to rename)

    mkdir


    Creates a new directory

    touch


    Creates a file or modifies an existing file’s last modified time and date

    wc


    Counts the number of words, lines or bytes of a file

    passwd


    Changes a user’s password

    rm


    Deletes a file

    rmdir


    Deletes a directory

    more


    Views text files one screen at a time

    less


    Views text files, allows scrolling up and down a line or page at a time

    whereis


    Displays the file path to a specified program and related manual files

    head


    Displays the first few lines of a file

    tail


    Displays the last few lines of a file

    sort


    Orders a file numerically or alphabetically

    tr


    Translates or removes characters of a file

    chmod


    Changes a file’s permissions

    grep


    Searches within a file

    Open the ls info page and identify the MENU.*

        What options do you have?

            Which files are listed

            What information is listed

            Sorting the output

            Details about version sort

            General output formatting

            Formatting file timestamps

            Formatting the file names

        Find the option that allows you to sort the output by modification time.

        -t or --sort=time

    Display the path to the first 3 README files. Use the man command to identify the correct option for locate.

    $ locate -l 3 README
    /etc/alternatives/README
    /etc/init.d/README
    /etc/rc0.d/README

    Create a file called test in your home directory. Find its absolute path with the locate command.

    $ touch test
    $ locate test
    /home/user/test

    Did you find it immediately? What did you have to do in order for locate to find it?

    $ sudo updatedb

    The file is newly created, therefore there is no record of it in the database.

    Search for the test file that you previously created, using the find command. What syntax did you use and what is the absolute path ?

    $ find ~ -name test

    or

    $ find . -name test
    /home/user/test

Answers to Explorational Exercises

    There is one command in the table above that doesn’t have a man page. Which one is it and why do you think that the command doesn’t have a man page?

    The cd command. It doesn’t have a man page because it is a built-in shell command.

    Using the commands in the table above, create the following file tree. The names that start with a capital are Directories and the ones in lower case are files.

    User
    ├── Documents
    |   ├──Hello
    |   |   ├──hey2
    |   |   ├──helloa
    |   |   └──ola5
    |   └──World
    |       └──earth9
    ├── Downloads
    |   ├──Music
    |   └──Songs
    |       ├──collection1
    |       └──collection2
    ├── Test
    |   └── passa
    └── test

    The solution is a combination of mkdir and touch commands.

    Display on the screen the present working directory, including the subfolders.

    $ ls -R

    Search within the tree for all files that end with a number.

    $ find ~ -name "*[0-9]"
    $ locate "*[0-9]"

    Remove the entire directory tree with a single command.

    $ rm -r Documents Downloads Test test
